{
  "comments": [
    {
      "unresolved": true,
      "key": {
        "uuid": "42dc3823_7c62e6d5",
        "filename": "/PATCHSET_LEVEL",
        "patchSetId": 1
      },
      "lineNbr": 0,
      "author": {
        "id": 1000046
      },
      "writtenOn": "2021-12-24T06:32:10Z",
      "side": 1,
      "message": "This is the write-up about the main part of our last meeting, and I would be interesting how usable it is, e.g. if it explains the issue properly and if I missed anything which is/was important as context or such.",
      "revId": "ca0b2f750db4964f44876db270df246d3cc14925",
      "serverId": "4fdfa107-4df9-4596-8e0a-1d2bbdd96e36"
    }
  ]
}